
- Chandragupta: Won’t the Greeks wise up to our deceit, now that Magadha is back to order? Chanakya: They are currently far more occupied in the Wars of the Diadochi. The possibility to fear is that they abandon their territory in Persia and invade India instead. To prevent that, I have already set events in place. 
	- Megasthenes and Thera are imprisoned in a high-security prison in an unknown location, not even Taxila
	- The rumors are spread amongst the public and they start hating the Greeks, the government has to protect the Greeks. Greeks want to leave. Curfews imposed in cities (intention to prevent Greeks from organizing to rebel against government).
	- Letter to Seleucus from Chandragupta saying they uncovered a plot amongst the Greek troops sent, they have been executed and Megasthenes has been sentenced to death as a Greek spy (with a date that gives Seleucid time to be able to intervene diplomatically), and Thera life imprisoned, it is being debated whether to execute her as she didn’t necessarily have anything to do with it.
	- Seleucus’s advisor says remember when Chanakya said he was suspected for being too pro-Greek? Maybe this will be damaging politically for him. Why should I care about Chanakya’s political career? Your daughter is Chanakya’s wife, king. Why did I ever agree to this marriage, what have I done to my daughter? Read the rest of the letter. 
	- Massagetae invasion, it is our belief that you have conspired with the Massagetae, told us under torture, and are mulling the evidence, torturing the Massagetae and Greek troops to extract information, etc.
	- Chaankya: I have personally intervened on behalf of Thera, but if Seleucid support is seen for the next Massagetae invasion, it will be be politically impossible for me to defend a Greek wife.
	- Seleucus: we’ll invade India! Advisor: that may not be advisable, king. Megasthenes and Thera are being held not as prisoners, but as hostages. Furthermore, we lost a defensive war against Chandragupta in peaceful times. Here, you are speaking of an offensive war from a far worse position, at a time when our military is already occupied, and if I may say so, getting battered, in the West, and at a time when the civilians of India have become so hostile to the Greeks. We have much to lose if we further strain our relationship with the Indians.
	- This is a set-up! Indeed, but why would they set this up? Because they want something from us. Offers his support against the Massagetae (no country in Greece or Asia has successfully resisted the Scythians alone).
	- Chanakya had sent a previous private letter to Seleucus’s advisor intimating him of possible hostilities. I do not believe the accusations of a high-level conspiracy, yet our respective kings may be rash and hot-headed, and escalate to prove their strength. It relies on us men of intellect to protect the peace and prosperity of nations. I am thus entrusting you with the responsibility of preventing Seleucus from doing anything rash, as I am doing with Chandragupta. You may need to tolerate some hostile words from Chandragupta, but I request your co-operation in avoiding unnecessary war, which I am personally distasteful of, or long-term degradation in the very special relationship that we have worked to craft.