Chandragupta notices Chanakya is not interested in the administration of Pataliputra anymore, and takes it as proof of Dream 11 (“young bulls laboring”). Chanakya encourages Chandragupta to begin his Southern campaign.

Chanakya doesn’t want to waste his time on travel, so doesn’t accompany Chandragupta on his Southern campaign. I’ll settle in Taxila. People think there’s a rift between him and Chandragupta. Thera asks him. Chanakya complains about (Greek? non-Brahmins?) people basing people’s motivations on incidents that occurred in their lives, instead of ideologies actually motivated by the truth. Even for people not motivated by the truth, the most common motivations are pretentiousness, tribalism and attachment to stories. If someone bases their beliefs on personal experience, it is an example of the third, and a scholar ought to avoid such stupidity.

Thera asks Chanakya: This great empire that you’ve created, are you not attached to it? Chanakya: one should not be attached to wild beasts, scientific theories, or kings. There might come a day when you find them to be wrong, and you may need to remove them. Thera asks Chanakya: you started with no resources, and went to establishing an empire that rules the entire Eastern half of the world. This is the culmination of your efforts. You have created a great empire, unified the East … how much of the economy do you estimate? Half. With such flattery, I must suspect you to be a vishakanya. In any case, of course I am proud. I simply do not attach much meaning to such symbolism. I am present in places where my presence adds value. I was with Chandragupta when I needed him to do the impossible. Ordinary military expeditions do not require me, regardless of their symbolism as a milestone.

Also being away from Pataliputra will give some time for get throne lusters to rear their heads while Chandragupta was away in the South, especially when a rift is believed to exist between Cāṇakya and Candragupta. 